Ravens brought Elijah bread
and meat morning and evening.
Jesus transformed
a hundred gallons of water
into very fine wine.
A hundred and twenty Christians
suddenly could speak
different languages.
What did those three events
have in common?
They were all three miracles
produced by holy spirit.
But miracles
are no longer happening today.
Is that right?
Not really, if you think about it.
If we think about it,
the peace, the love,
the harmony of Jehovah’s people
in a world that is so divided
is a modern-day miracle.
In contrast,
Satan’s world around us
is becoming more divided by race,
ethnicity, religion,
political affiliation, and so forth.
But Jehovah’s people
are more united than ever.
And when we attend
our assemblies and conventions,
we especially see this.
We see different races
and nationalities enjoying
a genuinely peaceful,
joyful gathering.
In fact, looking at a world map,
Sister Lett and I were able to calculate
that during the past 20 years,
we’ve attended assemblies,
conventions, large gatherings
in at least 82 different countries;
and every one of them
overflowed with love and joy;
convinced us even more
that these are Jehovah’s people
—people he’s gathered from all nations,
tribes, peoples, and tongues
into his organization
and is preparing for the new world.
But now we ask,
What makes this modern-day miracle possible?
The answer is,
it stems from a peaceful relationship
that we have with our Father, Jehovah,
who was called
at 1 Thessalonians 5:23,
“the God of peace.”
As his children,
we strive to imitate him.
We’re all brothers and sisters
—we have the same father—
so we are ones who show peace
and love like our Father.
But here’s another question:
Is maintaining this peace
and harmony automatic?
Well, is maintaining a garden,
an automobile, our health automatic?
No, it takes effort,
doesn’t it?
We’re all imperfect, so we have to work
at maintaining peace every day.
That’s the thought if you go
to 1 Peter chapter 3, please.
It does take effort.
First Peter 3:10:
“For ‘whoever would love life
and see good days
“‘must guard his tongue from bad
“‘and his lips from speaking deception.
“‘Let him turn away
from what is bad and do what is good;
“‘[now notice] let him seek
peace and pursue it.’”
So notice, effort is needed
to turn from bad and do good.
“Seek peace and pursue it”
—two action verbs.
If you want to illustrate that,
think of a policeman
seeking, pursuing, a criminal.
The criminal is trying
to get away, isn’t he?
Well, peace tries to get away
from us because of imperfection,
but we have to pursue it.
Interestingly, the Bible links
peace to happiness.
Proverbs 12:20,
the theme scripture for this talk, says:
“Those who promote peace have joy.”
Matthew 5:9:
“Happy are the peacemakers,
since they will be called sons of God.”
Now, it didn’t say,
“Happy are the peaceful.”
That’s just tranquil, passive
—even a dead body is peaceful.
No, “happy are the peacemakers.”
A peacemaker
actively promotes peace.
He makes peace
where it previously was lacking.
If you think about cows,
they make milk;
bees make honey;
a cheesemaker makes cheese;
a peacemaker makes peace.
Maybe it’s been lost;
it’s been disturbed;
but he has skill in restoring it and,
of course, a peacemaker
avoids doing anything that would disturb
the peace in the first place.
He works very hard
to create an environment
where peace can prevail.
But now that leads us into the discussion
about how peacemakers
avoid the two peace destroyers:
jealousy and contentiousness.
Now, these two peace disturbers
are identified
in James chapter 3.
Let’s go there, please.
In James chapter 3,
let’s read together
verses 14 and 15:
“But if you have bitter jealousy
“and contentiousness in your hearts,
“do not be bragging
and lying against the truth.
“This is not the wisdom
that comes down from above;
it is earthly,
animalistic, demonic.”
You notice first
that jealousy is identified.
What is jealousy?
It means to resent someone
because of his possessions,
talents, or position.
Rather than be happy for him,
we resent him,
maybe even dislike him for what he has
—usually things that we don’t have.
But what makes this very serious
is that jealousy can escalate
to being envy.
Now, what is envy, and what’s the difference
between envy and jealousy?
One Biblical reference work says this:
“‘Jealousy’ . . . refers to the desire
“to be as well off as another,
“. . . [but] ‘envy’ refers
to the desire to deprive
another of what he has.”
So the envious person
not only begrudges what someone has
but he actually wants
to take it away from him.
That second peace destroyer
is contentiousness.
What does that mean?
Being disagreeable, argumentative,
competitive—a terrible quality.
It’s the product of pride
and selfish ambition.
And as we read earlier
at James 3:14, 15,
it’s certainly not part of that “wisdom
that comes down from above,”
but, rather, it is “earthly,”
characteristic of earthly humans
who are alienated from God.
It is animalistic,
characteristic of animals
who lack spirituality
and are often contentious
with each other.
It is even demonic,
characteristic of the wicked spirits
who are very proud and ambitious.
But genuine peacemakers
work very hard
to avoid
these two peace disturbers:
jealousy and contentiousness.
They neither flaunt their talents
nor do they feel threatened
if others
are more skilled preachers, teachers,
organizers, or shepherds.
They’re very happy
to be considered “a lesser one,”
as Jesus encouraged
at Luke 9:48.
Now, it’s true that a peacemaker
may desire certain privileges of service,
but he is not consumed with ambition.
He’s balanced in his approach,
as it says at 1 Timothy 3:1:
“If a man is reaching out
to be an overseer,
he is desirous of a fine work.”
But it didn’t say that he
should ambitiously “grab”
to be an overseer; he’s balanced.
We could illustrate this
by reaching out for a nice,
tasty piece of fruit on a tree.
And then think of a small boy
very aggressively grabbing for a toy,
perhaps to try to take it
away from another boy.
There’s a real difference,
isn’t there?
But now, how does
a peacemaker reach out
to qualify
for privileges of service?
Well, he just works hard
to develop Christian qualities
within himself,
and he just works hard
in behalf of Kingdom interests.
He’s guided by Galatians 6:4,
where it says:
“He will have cause for rejoicing
“in regard to himself alone,
and not in comparison
with the other person.”
Additionally, a real peacemaker
humbly waits on Jehovah
to determine when he’s qualified
to receive a certain privilege.
And Jehovah knows, doesn’t he?
I love the account about Moses,
how when he was 40 years old,
he really thought
he was qualified
—ready to lead
the Israelites out of Egypt—
but Jehovah knew
he wasn’t ready yet.
But now, after tending flocks
for 40 years in Midian,
when he was now 80 years old,
Jehovah knew
that now he was ready.
Interestingly, at this point,
Moses thought he wasn’t ready,
but Jehovah
assured him that he was.
And when a peacemaker
does receive a privilege of service,
he credits receiving it to Jehovah
and not as a personal achievement.
So to conclude this portion
of our talk about avoiding
these peace disturbers, we say,
“May we all strive
to be genuine peacemakers,
“analyzing ourselves and praying
for Jehovah’s spirit
“to help us to avoid
any tendency to be jealous,
to envy, or to be contentious
with our brothers.”
But now, let’s talk about some things
we can do personally
to promote peace and joy.
In fact, let’s talk quickly
about six things we can do.
Number one:
Cultivate humility and modesty.
Humility means to consider others
superior to ourselves.
Modesty means to be aware
of our own limitations.
Now, if we have
those two closely related qualities,
we’ll be able to apply Romans 12:3,
which says that we
should not ‘think more of ourselves
‘than it is necessary to think,
but to think
so as to have a sound mind.’
And here’s the second thing
we can do to promote joy and peace:
Appreciate and value
the good qualities
and talents of others.
Focus on their good points,
not their flaws.
And how thankful we can be
that Jehovah does that with us.
Otherwise, we’d be doomed,
wouldn’t we?
But maybe you heard
the illustration of a brother
holding up a white piece of paper
with a red spot in the middle
and asking an audience
what they see.
Well, most say
that they see a red spot.
But then he points out
that actually 99 percent
of what they’re looking at
is white paper.
But we tend to notice the spot.
Well, if we’re not careful,
that’s what we can do with our brothers
—notice that flaw
rather than all the good qualities.
But may all of us cultivate
the Jehovahlike quality
of noticing,
appreciating, and valuing
the good qualities of our brothers.
Now here’s a third thing we can do:
Never presume that fellow Christians
are trying to outdo us.
First Corinthians 13:7 says
that love “believes”
and love “hopes all things.”
So we believe (we hope)
that our brothers are doing
what they’re doing out of a good motive
—to please Jehovah,
not to outdo us.
And we remember, Jehovah
has appointed only one Judge, Jesus.
We are no judge.
We have no right
to negatively judge our brothers’ motives.
Now here’s a fourth thing we can do:
Strive to always rejoice
over our brothers’ privileges
and successes.
Romans 12:15:
“Rejoice with those who rejoice;
weep with those who weep.”
Now, which is easier?
Well, generally, it’s not so hard
to weep with someone
who’s had some tragedy.
But now, what if some really good things
happen to them
and it hasn’t happened to us?
‘I’m so happy.
I just got appointed
as a regular pioneer.’
Now, we were really hoping
to get into the pioneer work ourself,
but we haven’t been able to do it.
Are we going to really be happy
from our heart with our brother?
Well, if we love our brother
and we love Jehovah,
then we’re going to work really hard
to have that right attitude from our heart.
We will smash
any hint of jealousy;
we’ll smash it with love.
Now here’s a fifth thing we can do:
Faithfully support those
who serve in responsible positions,
such as the elders.
And obviously doing that,
supporting these ones
that are taking the lead,
definitely promotes peace
and joy in the congregation.
Here’s one more thing:
Center your life on serving Jehovah
and helping others
rather than focusing on ourselves,
maybe our feelings,
our perceived reputation.
If we focus on serving Jehovah
and helping our brothers,
we’ll truly be
peace promoters
in the congregation.
By doing those six things, we’ll prove
that we’re peacemakers
(peace promoters)
who are reflecting
the wisdom from above.
Now, that’s the thought again.
Let’s go back to James chapter 3
—that wisdom from above.
Now, that’s what
we want to reflect on.
In James chapter 3,
let’s take a look
this time at verse 13:
“Who is wise
and understanding among you?
“Let him by his fine conduct
“demonstrate works
performed with a mildness
that comes from wisdom.”
And then drop down to verse 17:
“But the wisdom
from above is first of all pure,
“then [now notice] peaceable
“[It didn’t say peaceful, passive
but peaceable—that means a peacemaker.],
“reasonable, ready to obey,
“full of mercy and good fruits,
impartial, not hypocritical.
“Moreover, the fruit
of righteousness is sown
“in peaceful conditions
for those who are making peace.”
Yes, we’re encouraged
to be a peacemaker.
When we do this,
we bring joy to ourselves
and we impart joy to others and,
most importantly,
we make Jehovah rejoice.
But now, think about this:
Once a peacemaker
doesn’t mean
always a peacemaker.
We have to keep working
at this quality.
Now, this will be well-illustrated
in the following video interview.
I got married in 2002.
Around that time,
I was appointed a ministerial servant,
and my wife and I
were serving as regular pioneers.
In 2004,
we were given the opportunity
to serve as special pioneers.
It was something that we really wanted
because we wanted to do more for Jehovah.
So when we got that assignment,
we were delighted.
The brothers in the congregation
were also very happy for us.
But everything did not go smoothly.
As time went on,
I faced some difficult situations.
The fact that I was not appointed
as an elder made me feel disappointed.
In one congregation,
two brothers who had served
as ministerial servants
for a shorter time than I had
were appointed as elders.
I felt that those brothers
did not have as much experience as I had.
I thought, ‘I am the one with the experience,
so why didn’t I get appointed?’
I started to question my own qualifications,
and this made me very sad.
After the two brothers were appointed,
I started to dislike them.
I was also angry with them,
and the anger even progressed
a little toward hatred.
It was a real challenge for me
to serve in that congregation.
Attending meetings was difficult;
I would go with a heavy heart.
I put a lot of effort
into making personal changes
—changing my attitude
and getting rid of my negative traits.
I knew that if I did nothing,
it was going to affect the worship
I gave to Jehovah
and also the relationship with my brothers.
My wife and I
could end up completely losing our joy.
In order to make things right,
I prayed intensely to Jehovah.
I spent time in deep, personal Bible study.
My wife would also find articles
about maintaining peace with the brothers
and would give them to me to read.
She even selected Kingdom songs
that dealt with maintaining peace,
and she would sing them to me.
I made a lot of changes to my attitude
and worked hard to progress
as a person whom Jehovah would approve.
I tried to view my brothers
the same way Jehovah did
and to serve him with joy.
I really wanted to give
my best to Jehovah and to the brothers.
At the same time, I did not want
those wrong thoughts
to ever come back into my heart.
The valuable lesson that I have learned
is that privileges are not most important.
Rather, it is serving Jehovah
that brings genuine happiness.
And now I am finding
real joy and satisfaction
in my service to Jehovah.
So may each of us
prayerfully work to have the attitude
of wanting
to be a peacemaker.
And when we do this,
we prove to Jehovah
we’re the kind of person
that he wants in his new world.
At Psalm 37:11,
it says of the new world:
“The meek will possess the earth,
and they will find [their] exquisite delight
in the abundance of peace.”
So the new world
will be a very peaceful place.
But if we’re a peace promoter now,
we will convince Jehovah
that we will be an asset
toward that peace of his new world.
And think about this:
In the new world, it will be natural
for perfect people to just display peace
—this beautiful aspect
of the fruitage of Jehovah’s holy spirit.
But right now,
we have to work at it, don’t we?
We have to seek peace; pursue it.
But if we’re a peace pursuer now,
we will convince Jehovah
that we will be a peace displayer
in his righteous new world,
and he’ll want us to be there.
So let’s diligently promote peace
and contribute toward the strength
and the happiness
of Jehovah’s beautiful organization
(which really is a modern-day miracle),
remembering that those
who promote peace have joy
and impart joy to others.
And they make
Jehovah’s heart rejoice,
and all that rejoicing
will last forever.